The United States Geological Survey
welcomes you to the San Francisco Bay Area
San Francisco is the traditional focal point
of the San Francisco Bay Area
The estimated population of San Francisco
is 740,000 people
With nearly 16,000 people per square mile
San Francisco is the second most
densely populated major American city
The San Francisco Bay Area,
also known as the "Bay Area"
is the metropolitan region that surrounds
the San Francisco Bay in Northern California
It encompasses the cities of
San Francisco, San José,
Oakland, their suburbs, and also the North Bay
Silicon Valley is located in
the southern Bay Area
Thousands of high technology companies
are headquartered either in
or near Silicon Valley
the high-tech hub of the nation
The Bay Area is comprised of cities, towns,
universities,
military bases, airports,
and associated regional, state and
national parks sprawled over nine counties
The USGS Western Region Center
is located 50 km
south of San Francisco
in the city of Menlo Park
which has a population of approximately
31,000 people
The Menlo Park Science Center
has been the flagship research
center for the USGS
in the western United States
for more than 50 years
It is the largest USGS research center
in the West
and houses extensive laboratories,
scientific infrastructure, and library facilities
Since its establishment in 1954,
the USGS facilities in the Menlo Park area
have been home to numerous scientists
and research teams
whose work has done much
to advance the understanding
of the Earth
My name is Rufus Catchings
I'm Chief Scientist of
the Earthquake Hazards Team
here in Menlo Park
The Earthquake Hazards Team does
research related
to earthquakes throughout the
western United States
We monitor earthquakes from
the Canadian Border
all the way down to Mexico
California, Oregon, Washington
Our principle goals are to
understand earthquakes
what makes them happen,
try to understand, possibly,
what triggers an earthquake,
when we are likely to have one,
but more importantly to understand
when and where and what will be the hazard
and how can we minimize those
hazards related to earthquakes
It was here in Menlo Park that in the 1960s
a basic research project on
the Earth's magnetic field
laid the foundation for what became
a revolution in the earth sciences
a revolution we now call plate tectonics
Scientists in Menlo Park conduct a wide
array of both basic and applied science
usually in collaboration with scientists
from outside the Center
Scientific research and natural-hazard
assessments are critical
to effective mitigation planning,
short-term forecasting,
and event response
As a geologist I am interested
in the relationship between
earthquakes and plate tectonics
The San Andreas Fault is a
major plate boundary
and I've been investigating how
that boundary changes through geologic time
which means over the last
several million years
I just finished a study of this
that includes an animation
that shows how the geography of California
has changed through time
I am currently working on
applying this broad knowledge
to the modern San Andreas Fault
in particular
I am interested in the northern end
of the San Andreas Fault
and how the fault slip ends
where it goes at the end of the
San Andreas Fault
where it is very new and poorly defined
As the Nation's largest water, earth, and
biological science and civilian mapping agency
the USGS collects, monitors,
analyzes, and provides
scientific understanding about natural
resource conditions, issues, and problems
Our team has two or three main themes
They are
coastal hazards
which include coastal erosion,
landslides, coral reef bleaching,
and other things
And coastal mapping
We collect lots of high-resolution
maps in our coastal seas
and deep oceans around the United States
The Menlo Park as well as the
USGS Reston library are designated
as official depositories for selected
U.S. Government publications
This branch of the USGS library
collection covers
earth sciences with emphasis on Western U.S.
and the Circum-Pacific area
In addition to the standard
USGS topographical maps,
the USGS map sales office has a
number of educational posters
and USGS publications for sale
Also, a large variety of pamphlets and
brochures on various earth-science topics
are available at no cost
The USGS currently employs about 600 people
at their Middlefield Road campus in Menlo Park
Their findings have helped to find
mineral and energy resources,
solve environmental problems,
and make society safer from natural hazards
We have a group of scientists here
who do work on water resource studies
Some of the topics that we work on are:
the role of climate change on water resources,
we also study the role of streams and rivers
and how they interact with ground water,
and finally we have a big program here
looking at the ecology and the water resources
of San Francisco Bay
The USGS has made great
efforts to bring the excitement
and understanding of science
to decision-makers and the public,
so that they can better appreciate
the Earth we live on and
make more informed decisions
about land use and natural hazards